---
layout: blog
title: How to Port a Board for RIOT
authors:
- name: Martine S. Lenders
  email: mlenders@riot-os.org
  affiliation: Freie Universität Berlin
  githubid: miri64
  twitterid: miri_64
  stackoverflowid: 11921757
date: 2021-02-26
tags: riot, board, microcontroller, adafruit, feather, nrf52
description:
    Our contributor Martine Lenders documents her experiences of porting her
    very first board to RIOT
image: feather-nrf52840.jpg
---

*This blog post was originally published on [Martine's blog in February
2020][original-post].*

# Introduction

2020 marked a debut for me:
Though I am a long-term contributor to RIOT—my oldest
contribution [goes back to June 2011][a2c7cf8]—I never actually ported a board
to support RIOT. This [changed at the beginning of 2020][PR].

RIOT is an operating system for the Internet of Things (IoT).
This means it aims to support hardware platforms on which typical PC operating
systems such as Linux, Mac OSX, or Windows or even phone operating systems like
Android or iOS do not fit.
When talking of IoT devices, the RIOT community usually considers in terms of
[kilobytes of memory][RFC 7228]. Not gigabytes, not megabytes, _kilobytes_! As
in, a few 1000 _bytes_. The reason behind the focus on memory-constraint
devices, that IoT devices
can not follow [Moore's Law], which states that every two years the number of
transistors in a given piece of computer hardware approximately doubles. In
fact, the efforts to save cost and energy for IoT hardware are directly opposed
to Moore's Law: every additional transistor, be it for calculation or storage,
costs more money and leads to more energy usage. Given, that for the IoT a
multiple of 10 of devices per person is expected, meaning at least 100 billion
devices deployed, low cost and low energy usage is vital.

The main code base of RIOT is written in the [C programming language][C], but
bindings for [C++], [Rust], [Python], [JavaScript], and others exist as well.

For RIOT, a board is defined as a module that defines a [microcontroller] and
configuration parameters how this microcontroller can interact with other
devices on this platform and the outside world. A board
is somewhat like a computer system (e.g. a PC), and the microcontroller the
central processor (CPU).
The process of porting a board is providing these configuration parameters.

Personally, I am more involved in the networking architecture of RIOT—I make
sure RIOT can talk to the outside world. So my closest contact to hardware in
that area is mostly the interaction with the network device. Thus, there was
just never the need for me to port a board for RIOT. So why did I do it now?
Mainly, because I wanted to try and learn, and because I had this piece of
hardware lying around, for which I knew that the port would be relatively easy,
considering my skill set.

The board I ported is the [Adafruit Feather nRF52840]. I bought this board
mainly to save some shipping costs, but also because I like
the form factor of Adafruit's Feather line and wanted to see more support for it
in RIOT.

And my work was fruitful: After I provided the pull request, my port then
became part of RIOT release [2020.01] which came out only a few weeks later.

I am intentionally leaving the process of [creating a pull request] out
as I want to focus mainly on how to provide a board port, not how
to get it upstream.

# Creating the board port
A board in RIOT is mostly just configuration, both for the build
system and the actual code. But first I needed a place to put this
configuration.
I cut out the “Adafruit” out of the board's identifying name. Both for
simplicity and because the [Adafruit Feather M0] already was called
`feather-m0`. Hence, for
RIOT's purposes the board is now just called `feather-nrf52840`.
Board definitions in RIOT are placed in the directory [`boards/`][boards],
so I [created a new sub-directory under the name `feather-nrf52840`][directory]
for my new board configuration to reside in.

There I first created a Makefile to tell the build system [`make`][make] that
the directory is indeed describing a board. This file is called
[`boards/feather-nrf52840/Makefile`][Makefile] and includes minimal content:

{% highlight Makefile %}
MODULE = board

include $(RIOTBASE)/Makefile.base
{% endhighlight %}

The first line tells the build system that this is a module called `board` (all
boards are called like this) and the third includes all the stuff the build
system developers of RIOT already provided for a module to be built.

However, the build system needs more information. What features (i.e. interfaces
and devices) does the board support? This is defined in the file
[`boards/feather-nrf52840/Makefile.features`][Makefile.features]:

{% highlight Makefile %}
CPU_MODEL = nrf52840xxaa

# Put defined MCU peripherals here (in alphabetical order)
FEATURES_PROVIDED += periph_i2c
FEATURES_PROVIDED += periph_spi
FEATURES_PROVIDED += periph_uart
FEATURES_PROVIDED += periph_usbdev

# Various other features (if any)
FEATURES_PROVIDED += radio_nrf802154

include $(RIOTBOARD)/common/nrf52/Makefile.features
{% endhighlight %}

The first line tells the build system which CPU (or more accurate
microcontoller), applying a naming scheme that the build system understands.
Basically, we configure, "this board is using an nRF52840 microcontroller".
Lines 4-9 tell the build system which features are provided by the board, naming
communication interfaces such as I²C, SPI, UART, and USB, but also that the
radio of this board can speak the [IEEE 802.15.4] protocol—imagine something
like low-power WiFi—via its nRF microcontroller.
The last line declares to include further features provided by the nRF52 family
of microcontrollers in general.

Lastly, I tell the build system with the file
[`boards/feather-nrf52840/Makefile.include`][Makefile.include], what else needs
to be included for this board to be programmable, among them the most important
thing: the programmer itself. In case of the Feather nRF52840 this is the Segger
JLink:

{% highlight Makefile %}
# HACK: replicate dependency resolution in Makefile.dep, only works
# if `USEMODULE` or `DEFAULT_MODULE` is set by the command line or in the
# application Makefile.
ifeq (,$(filter stdio_%,$(DISABLE_MODULE) $(USEMODULE)))
  RIOT_TERMINAL ?= jlink
endif

include $(RIOTMAKE)/tools/serial.inc.mk

include $(RIOTBOARD)/common/nrf52/Makefile.include
{% endhighlight %}

Now, we finally leave the build system and tell the microcontroller how to map
all the peripheral interfaces to the outside world and to devices on the board in
the [`boards/feather-nrf52840/include/periph_config.h`][periph_conf.h]. Namely,
I configured one UART, one I²C and one SPI interface according to the pin
labeling on the board. I strictly followed the [schematics] provided by Adafruit
for this and looked at the `periph_conf.h` of other nRF52-based boards for
reference.

{% highlight C %}
/*
 * Copyright (C) 2020 Freie Universität Berlin
 *
 * This file is subject to the terms and conditions of the GNU Lesser
 * General Public License v2.1. See the file LICENSE in the top level
 * directory for more details.
 */

/**
 * @ingroup     boards_feather-nrf52840
 * @{
 *
 * @file
 * @brief       Peripheral configuration for the Adafruit Feather nRF52840
 *              Express
 *
 * @author      Martine S. Lenders <m.lenders@fu-berlin.de>
 *
 */

#ifndef PERIPH_CONF_H
#define PERIPH_CONF_H

#include "periph_cpu.h"
#include "cfg_clock_32_1.h"
#include "cfg_rtt_default.h"
#include "cfg_timer_default.h"

#ifdef __cplusplus
extern "C" {
#endif

/**
 * @name    UART configuration
 * @{
 */
static const uart_conf_t uart_config[] = {
    {
        .dev        = NRF_UARTE0,
        .rx_pin     = GPIO_PIN(0,24),
        .tx_pin     = GPIO_PIN(0,25),
        .rts_pin    = (uint8_t)GPIO_UNDEF,
        .cts_pin    = (uint8_t)GPIO_UNDEF,
        .irqn       = UARTE0_UART0_IRQn,
    },
};

#define UART_0_ISR          (isr_uart0)

#define UART_NUMOF          ARRAY_SIZE(uart_config)
/** @} */

/**
 * @name    SPI configuration
 * @{
 */
static const spi_conf_t spi_config[] = {
    {
        .dev  = NRF_SPI0,
        .sclk = 14,
        .mosi = 13,
        .miso = 15
    }
};

#define SPI_NUMOF           ARRAY_SIZE(spi_config)
/** @} */

/**
 * @name    I2C configuration
 * @{
 */
static const i2c_conf_t i2c_config[] = {
    {
        .dev = NRF_TWIM1,
        .scl = 11,
        .sda = 12,
        .speed = I2C_SPEED_NORMAL
    }
};
#define I2C_NUMOF           ARRAY_SIZE(i2c_config)
/** @} */

#ifdef __cplusplus
}
#endif

#endif /* PERIPH_CONF_H */
{% endhighlight %}

We also need to tell the sensor/actuator abstraction layer of RIOT, [SAUL],
where to find all the buttons and LEDs provided on the board, so it can react to
button push events and control the LEDs. This we do in
[`boards/feather-nrf52840/include/gpio_params.h`][gpio_params.h]. There are
two LEDs and one switch, and I again just followed the [schematics]:

{% highlight C %}
/*
 * Copyright (C) 2020 Freie Universität Berlin
 *
 * This file is subject to the terms and conditions of the GNU Lesser
 * General Public License v2.1. See the file LICENSE in the top level
 * directory for more details.
 */

/**
 * @ingroup     boards_feather-nrf52840
 * @{
 *
 * @file
 * @brief       Configuration of SAUL mapped GPIO pins
 *
 * @author      Martine S. Lenders <m.lenders@fu-berlin.de>
 */

#ifndef GPIO_PARAMS_H
#define GPIO_PARAMS_H

#include "board.h"
#include "saul/periph.h"

#ifdef __cplusplus
extern "C" {
#endif

/**
 * @brief    LED configuration
 */
static const  saul_gpio_params_t saul_gpio_params[] =
{
    {
        .name  = "LED Red (D3)",
        .pin   = LED0_PIN,
        .mode  = GPIO_OUT,
        .flags = (SAUL_GPIO_INIT_CLEAR),
    },
    {
        .name  = "LED Blue (Conn)",
        .pin   = LED1_PIN,
        .mode  = GPIO_OUT,
        .flags = (SAUL_GPIO_INIT_CLEAR),
    },
    {
        .name  = "UserSw",
        .pin   = BTN0_PIN,
        .mode  = BTN0_MODE,
        .flags = SAUL_GPIO_INVERTED,
    },
};

#ifdef __cplusplus
}
#endif

#endif /* GPIO_PARAMS_H */
/** @} */
{% endhighlight %}

Lastly, our board needs to include some low-level debugging LED and button [GPIO]
pins and needs to initialize those pins. We do this in the in
[`boards/feather-nrf52840/include/board.h`][board.h] and
[`boards/feather-nrf52840/board.c`][board.c].
Rumors tell, this might not be necessary in the future, so watch out for this
later if you read this when you follow my instructions ;-).

{% highlight C %}
/*
 * Copyright (C) 2020 Freie Universität Berlin
 *
 * This file is subject to the terms and conditions of the GNU Lesser
 * General Public License v2.1. See the file LICENSE in the top level
 * directory for more details.
 */

/**
 * @{
 *
 * @file
 * @author  Martine Lenders <m.lenders@fu-berlin.de>
 */

#include "cpu.h"
#include "board.h"

#include "periph/gpio.h"

void board_init(void)
{
    /* initialize the boards LEDs */
    gpio_init(LED0_PIN, GPIO_OUT);
    gpio_clear(LED0_PIN);
    gpio_init(LED1_PIN, GPIO_OUT);
    gpio_clear(LED1_PIN);

    /* initialize the CPU */
    cpu_init();
}

/** @} */
{% endhighlight %}

{% highlight C %}
/*
 * Copyright (C) 2020 Freie Universität Berlin
 *
 * This file is subject to the terms and conditions of the GNU Lesser
 * General Public License v2.1. See the file LICENSE in the top level
 * directory for more details.
 */

/**
 * @{
 *
 * @file
 * @author  Martine Lenders <m.lenders@fu-berlin.de>
 */

#include "cpu.h"
#include "board.h"

#include "periph/gpio.h"

void board_init(void)
{
    /* initialize the boards LEDs */
    gpio_init(LED0_PIN, GPIO_OUT);
    gpio_clear(LED0_PIN);
    gpio_init(LED1_PIN, GPIO_OUT);
    gpio_clear(LED1_PIN);

    /* initialize the CPU */
    cpu_init();
}

/** @} */
{% endhighlight %}

After that the most important steps are needed 😉: I tested if everything worked
as configured, [provided some documentation how to do that][feather doc], and
then called it done.

# Conclusion
Given that you already worked with C and `make` and that the microcontroller for
the board you want to port [is already provided][CPUs], porting a board is quite
straight-forward. Basically, all that is needed are seven very concise files. All
you need beyond that is to look up what other people did and maybe read a bit up
on the [boards doc]. Being able to read hardware schematics also helps, but I
found myself quickly into the graphic notation for that, though I barely had
contact with this kind of notation before.

##### Update
Since the original writing of this blog article [another file][Kconfig] is
needed for a board port, so the new Kconfig system can recognize it.
It mostly reflects the content of `Makefile.features` and `Makefile.include`,
just in Kconfig language:

{% highlight Kconfig %}
# Copyright (c) 2020 HAW Hamburg
#
# This file is subject to the terms and conditions of the GNU Lesser
# General Public License v2.1. See the file LICENSE in the top level
# directory for more details.

config BOARD
    default "feather-nrf52840" if BOARD_FEATHER_NRF52840

config BOARD_FEATHER_NRF52840
    bool
    default y
    select BOARD_COMMON_NRF52
    select CPU_MODEL_NRF52840XXAA
    select HAS_PERIPH_I2C
    select HAS_PERIPH_SPI
    select HAS_PERIPH_UART
    select HAS_PERIPH_USBDEV
    select HAS_RADIO_NRF802154

source "$(RIOTBOARD)/common/nrf52/Kconfig"
{% endhighlight %}

[original-post]: https://blog.martine-lenders.eu/riot-board-en.html
[RIOT]: https://riot-os.org/
[a2c7cf8]: https://github.com/RIOT-OS/RIOT/commit/a2c7cf8f9afb75fbdf7168e8f8e56605c9cb1037
[PR]: https://github.com/RIOT-OS/RIOT/pull/13085
[RFC 7228]: https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7228#section-3
[Moore's Law]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Moore%27s_law
[C]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/C_(programming_language)
[C++]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/C++
[Rust]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rust_(programming_language)
[Python]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MicroPython
[JavaScript]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/JerryScript
[microcontroller]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Microcontroller
[Adafruit Feather nRF52840]: https://learn.adafruit.com/introducing-the-adafruit-nrf52840-feather/
[2020.01]: https://github.com/RIOT-OS/RIOT/releases/tag/2020.01
[Creating a pull request]: https://github.com/RIOT-OS/RIOT/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md#pull-requests
[Adafruit Feather M0]: https://learn.adafruit.com/adafruit-feather-m0-basic-proto
[make]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Make_(software)
[boards]: https://github.com/RIOT-OS/RIOT/tree/78b5c1ee5c55/boards
[directory]: https://github.com/RIOT-OS/RIOT/tree/78b5c1ee5c55/boards/feather-nrf52840
[Makefile]: https://github.com/RIOT-OS/RIOT/blob/78b5c1ee5c55/boards/feather-nrf52840/Makefile
[Makefile.features]: https://github.com/RIOT-OS/RIOT/blob/78b5c1ee5c55/boards/feather-nrf52840/Makefile.features
[IEEE 802.15.4]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/IEEE_802.15.4
[Makefile.include]: https://github.com/RIOT-OS/RIOT/blob/78b5c1ee5c55/boards/feather-nrf52840/Makefile.include
[periph_conf.h]: https://github.com/RIOT-OS/RIOT/blob/78b5c1ee5c55/boards/feather-nrf52840/include/periph_conf.h
[schematics]: https://learn.adafruit.com/assets/68545
[SAUL]: https://api.riot-os.org/group__drivers__saul.html
[gpio_params.h]: https://github.com/RIOT-OS/RIOT/blob/78b5c1ee5c55/boards/feather-nrf52840/include/gpio_params.h
[GPIO]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/General-purpose_input/output
[board.h]: https://github.com/RIOT-OS/RIOT/blob/78b5c1ee5c55/boards/feather-nrf52840/include/board.h
[board.c]: https://github.com/RIOT-OS/RIOT/blob/78b5c1ee5c55/boards/feather-nrf52840/board.c
[boards doc]: https://api.riot-os.org/group__boards.html
[feather doc]: https://api.riot-os.org/group__boards__feather-nrf52840.html
[CPUs]: {% link cpus.html %}
[Kconfig]: https://github.com/RIOT-OS/RIOT/blob/ecebdb761b8dae7db4907af512f99329ddb1d6e4/boards/feather-nrf52840/Kconfig
